Add an article to day07 (#173)
scalacenter/scala-advent-of-code: docs/2022/puzzles/day07.md

import Solver from "../../../../../website/src/components/Solver.js"

# Day 7: No Space Left On Device
code by [Jan Boerman](https://twitter.com/JanBoerman95)

## Puzzle description

https://adventofcode.com/2022/day/7

## Solution

> First of all, we need to come up with a way to parse out input code:

Reviewer: Id swap the definition + explanation of the Command enum and the input parsing, I think it works better if you don't have forward references

```Scala

> def input (str: String) = str.linesIterator.map {

Reviewer: this snippet should also include imports for Command and TerminalOutput

    case ListFiles
enum TerminalOutput:
    case Cmd(cmd: Command)
    case Directory(name: String)
    case File(size: Int, name: String)
```

Now let's make a directory structure, in which we will define files as [`mutable.Map`](https://dotty.epfl.ch/api/scala/collection/mutable/Map.html), that can contain name (String) and size (Integer), will have reference to parent directory, and will be able to contain subdirectories:

```Scala
class DirectoryStructure(val name: String,
                         val subDirectories: mutable.Map[String, DirectoryStructure],
                         val files: mutable.Map[String, Int],
                         val parent: DirectoryStructure | Null)
```
We have to come up with a way to calculate directory size -- we can use [`sum`](https://www.scala-lang.org/files/archive/api/current/scala/collection/immutable/List.html#sum[B%3E:A](implicitnum:scala.math.Numeric[B]):B) for the size of all files in directory and define size of all of the following subdirectories recursively, which will take care of problem:

```Scala
def directorySize(dir: DirectoryStructure): Int =
    dir.files.values.sum + dir.subDirectories.values.map(directorySize).sum
```

> Now we need to create a function, to transfer input in directory form. For that we can use [`match`](https://docs.scala-lang.org/tour/pattern-matching.html) and separate input, -- for that we can use cases and recursion will do the rest for us:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now we need to create a function to build the directory structure from the input. For that we can use [`match`](https://docs.scala-lang.org/tour/pattern-matching.html) and separate input, -- for that we can use cases and recursion will do the rest for us:
```

```Scala
def buildState(input: List[TerminalOutput], currentDir: DirectoryStructure | Null, rootDir: DirectoryStructure): Unit = input match
    case Cmd(ChangeDirectory("/")) :: t => buildState(t, rootDir, rootDir)
    case Cmd(ChangeDirectory("..")) :: t => buildState(t, currentDir.parent, rootDir)
    case Cmd(ChangeDirectory(name)) :: t => buildState(t, currentDir.subDirectories(name), rootDir)
    case Cmd(ListFiles) :: t => buildState(t, currentDir, rootDir)
    case File(size, name) :: t =>
        currentDir.files.put(name, size)
        buildState(t, currentDir, rootDir)
    case Directory(name) :: t =>
        currentDir.subDirectories.put(name, DirectoryStructure(name, mutable.Map.empty, mutable.Map.empty, currentDir))
        buildState(t, currentDir, rootDir)
    case Nil => ()
```

> And now, we need to assemble the program, in part one, we will just search for all directories with size smaller `100000`, and calculate the sum of their sizes. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And now, we need to assemble the program, in part one, we will search for all directories with size smaller `100000`, and calculate the sum of their sizes. 
```

Reviewer: we should follow the inclusive language guide: https://docs.scala-lang.org/contribute/inclusive-language-guide.html#the-words-easy-simple-quick-and-trivial

```Scala
def part1(output: String): Int =
    val rootDir = buildData(output)
    collectSizes(rootDir, _ < 100000).sum
```

In part two, we are looking for the smallest directory, which size is big enough to free up enough space on the filesystem to install update (30,000,00). We have to find out how much space is required for update, considering our available unused space:

```Scala
def part2(output: String): Int = 
    val rootDir = buildData(output)
    val totalUsed = directorySize(rootDir)
    val totalUnused = 70_000_000 - totalUsed
    val required = 30_000_000 - totalUnused
    collectSizes(rootDir, _ >= required).min
```

##Final Solution

```Scala
import scala.annotation.tailrec
import scala.collection.mutable
import TerminalOutput.*
import Command.*

> def input (str: String) = str.linesIterator.map {

Reviewer: please could you add vertical spacing (1 line) between the various definitions

    case s"$$ cd $directory" => Cmd(ChangeDirectory(directory))
    case s"$$ ls" => Cmd(ListFiles)
    case s"dir $directory" => Directory(directory)
    case s"$size $file" => File(size.toInt, file)
}.toList
enum Command:
    case ChangeDirectory(directory: String)
    case ListFiles
enum TerminalOutput:

>     case Cmd(cmd: Command)

Reviewer: please could you indent across the file with 2 spaces.
